README.md, before:

# Example programs for ngdevkit, the open source SDK for Neo-Geo


ngdevkit-examples is a collection of Neo-Geo programs that can be
built with [ngdevkit](ngdevkit), the open source software development
kit for the Neo-Geo hardware.

The examples in this repository go from a simple hello world, to
various aspects of the Neo-Geo hardware, such as palette handling,
tiles and sprites, vertical blank and interrupt handling...

With ngdevkit-examples you will learn what it takes to run a C or
assembler program on the Neo-Geo hardware, how to compile your
program with ngdevkit, and how to use the various tools and API
provided by ngdevkit.

For additional retro points, ngdevkit-examples provides a
GnGeo configuration that enables GLSL pixel shader rendering and
comes with a simple and fast CRT scanline shader :P


## How to compile the examples

### Installing packages

Prior to using ngdevkit-examples, you must install
[ngdevkit](ngdevkit) and a couple of additional packages on your
system. If you're running on Ubuntu or Debian, you can install debian
packages of ngdevkit and GnGeo with:

    add-apt-repository -y ppa:dciabrin/ngdevkit
    apt-get update
    apt-get install -y ngdevkit ngdevkit-gngeo
    # the remaining packages are only required for the examples
    apt-get install -y pkg-config autoconf automake zip imagemagick sox libsox-fmt-mp3

If you're running on macOS, you can install pre-built [brew][brew]
packages, available in the ngdevkit tap:

    # If you haven't done it yet, make sure XCode is installed first
    sudo xcode-select --install
    brew tap dciabrin/ngdevkit
    brew install ngdevkit ngdevkit-gngeo
    # make sure you use brew's python3 in your shell
    export PATH=/usr/local/opt/python3/bin:$PATH
    pip3 install pygame
    # the remaining packages are only required for the examples
    brew install pkg-config autoconf automake zip imagemagick sox

If you're running on Windows 10, you can use native pre-built packages
for the [MSYS2][msys2] environment. When running in a MSYS2 shell, you
can install the packages as follows:

    echo -e '\n[ngdevkit]\nSigLevel = PackageOptional\nServer = https://dciabrin.net/msys2-ngdevkit/$arch' >> /etc/pacman.conf
    pacman -Sy
    pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-ngdevkit mingw-w64-x86_64-ngdevkit-gngeo
    # the remaining packages are only required for the examples
    pacman -S autoconf automake make zip mingw-w64-x86_64-imagemagick mingw-w64-x86_64-sox

Additionally, on Windows 10, you also need an [official Python 3
release for Windows][pywin] from https://www.python.org installed on
your machine. Assuming you installed it in the default localtion for a
user called `ngdevkit`, you can proceed and install PyGame with:

    C:/Users/ngdevkit/AppData/Local/Programs/Python/Python39/python -m pip install pygame


If you can't install pre-built binary packages, you can clone the
[ngdevkit](ngdevkit) git repository and follow the build instructions:

    git clone https://github.com/dciabrin/ngdevkit
    # build the devkit according to your system
    # once done, add ngdevkit in your path with:
    eval $(make shellinit)


### Compiling examples

Once everything is installed and ngdevkit is available in your
path, you can compile prepare the compilation with:

    # import the GLSL CRT shader for GnGeo
    git submodule update --init --recursive

And build all the examples with the following commands if you are running
Linux:

    cd examples
    autoreconf -iv
    ./configure
    make

For macOS, make sure you use brew's python3 and gmake:

    cd examples
    export PATH=/usr/local/opt/python3/bin:$PATH
    autoreconf -iv
    ./configure
    gmake

For Windows, you have to build the examples with extra flags and
pass the location of the external Python 3 installation written
as an MSYS2 path:

    cd examples
    # ensure Windows-native binaries are available in PATH
    export PATH=/mingw64/bin:$PATH
    autoreconf -I/mingw64/share/aclocal -iv
    ./configure --enable-msys2 --with-python=/c/Users/ngdevkit/AppData/Local/Programs/Python/Python39/python
    make

    # build all the examples
    autoreconf -iv
    ./configure
    make


## Running the compiled examples

Once you have built the examples, go into a subdirectory to
test the compiled example and run GnGeo from the makefile:

    cd examples/01-helloworld
    make gngeo
    # or run "make gngeo-fullscreen" for a more immersive test

GnGeo will automatically enable the GLSL pixel shader if OpenGL
is available on your system and detected during the configure
step. For more info, look at the [common makefile](Makefile.common).

Note: If you're running a recent macOS, [System Integrity Protection][sip]
may prevent you from running GnGeo from make, so you may need to run
it from your terminal:

    eval $(gmake -n gngeo)


## Source-level debugging

ngdevkit provides a modified version of GnGeo which supports remote
debugging via GDB. You need to start GnGeo in debug mode and run
GDB to attach to it:

    cd examples/01-helloworld
    # start GnGeo in debug mode
    eval $(make -n gngeo) -D &
    m68k-neogeo-elf-gdb rom.elf

GDB uses the debug symbols from the ELF file rather than the ROM file
directly, so it knows all C source files, symbols and locations. This
enables source-level debugging of your C program in addition to usual
m68k ASM debugger.

Once GDB is started, connect to the emulator to start the the
debugging session. For example:

    # GnGeo listens on the standard GDB port 2159
    (gdb) target remote :2159
    Remote debugging using :2159
    0x00c04300 in ?? ()
    (gdb) b main.c:52
    Breakpoint 1 at 0x57a: file main.c, line 52.
    (gdb) c


## License

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU
Lesser General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
License along with this program. If not, see
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.


[ngdevkit]: https://github.com/dciabrin/ngdevkit
[brew]: https://brew.sh
[sip]: https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT204899
[msys2]: https://www.msys2.org
[pywin]: https://www.python.org/downloads/windows

Commit message:

Add instructions to use nightly RPM on Fedora
Ref dciabrin/ngdevkit#57

README.md, after:

# Example programs for ngdevkit, the open source SDK for Neo-Geo


ngdevkit-examples is a collection of Neo-Geo programs that can be
built with [ngdevkit](ngdevkit), the open source software development
kit for the Neo-Geo hardware.

The examples in this repository go from a simple hello world, to
various aspects of the Neo-Geo hardware, such as palette handling,
tiles and sprites, vertical blank and interrupt handling...

With ngdevkit-examples you will learn what it takes to run a C or
assembler program on the Neo-Geo hardware, how to compile your
program with ngdevkit, and how to use the various tools and API
provided by ngdevkit.

For additional retro points, ngdevkit-examples provides a
GnGeo configuration that enables GLSL pixel shader rendering and
comes with a simple and fast CRT scanline shader :P


## How to compile the examples

### Installing packages

Prior to using ngdevkit-examples, you must install
[ngdevkit](ngdevkit) and a couple of additional packages on your
system. If you're running on Ubuntu or Debian, you can install debian
packages of ngdevkit and GnGeo with:

    add-apt-repository -y ppa:dciabrin/ngdevkit
    apt-get update
    apt-get install -y ngdevkit ngdevkit-gngeo
    # the remaining packages are only required for the examples
    apt-get install -y pkg-config autoconf automake zip imagemagick sox libsox-fmt-mp3

If you are running a Fedora distribution, pre-built packages are
available in COPR, and can be installed with the following commands:

    dnf copr enable dciabrin/ngdevkit
    dnf install ngdevkit ngdevkit-gngeo
    # the remaining packages are only requred for the examples
    dnf install install pkg-config autoconf zip ImageMagick sox

If you're running on macOS, you can install pre-built [brew][brew]
packages, available in the ngdevkit tap:

    # If you haven't done it yet, make sure XCode is installed first
    sudo xcode-select --install
    brew tap dciabrin/ngdevkit
    brew install ngdevkit ngdevkit-gngeo
    # make sure you use brew's python3 in your shell
    export PATH=/usr/local/opt/python3/bin:$PATH
    pip3 install pygame
    # the remaining packages are only required for the examples
    brew install pkg-config autoconf automake zip imagemagick sox

If you're running on Windows 10, you can use native pre-built packages
for the [MSYS2][msys2] environment. When running in a MSYS2 shell, you
can install the packages as follows:

    echo -e '\n[ngdevkit]\nSigLevel = PackageOptional\nServer = https://dciabrin.net/msys2-ngdevkit/$arch' >> /etc/pacman.conf
    pacman -Sy
    pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-ngdevkit mingw-w64-x86_64-ngdevkit-gngeo
    # the remaining packages are only required for the examples
    pacman -S autoconf automake make zip mingw-w64-x86_64-imagemagick mingw-w64-x86_64-sox

Additionally, on Windows 10, you also need an [official Python 3
release for Windows][pywin] from https://www.python.org installed on
your machine. Assuming you installed it in the default localtion for a
user called `ngdevkit`, you can proceed and install PyGame with:

    C:/Users/ngdevkit/AppData/Local/Programs/Python/Python39/python -m pip install pygame


If you can't install pre-built binary packages, you can clone the
[ngdevkit](ngdevkit) git repository and follow the build instructions:

    git clone https://github.com/dciabrin/ngdevkit
    # build the devkit according to your system
    # once done, add ngdevkit in your path with:
    eval $(make shellinit)


### Compiling examples

Once everything is installed and ngdevkit is available in your
path, you can compile prepare the compilation with:

    # import the GLSL CRT shader for GnGeo
    git submodule update --init --recursive

And build all the examples with the following commands if you are running
Linux:

    cd examples
    autoreconf -iv
    ./configure
    make

For macOS, make sure you use brew's python3 and gmake:

    cd examples
    export PATH=/usr/local/opt/python3/bin:$PATH
    autoreconf -iv
    ./configure
    gmake

For Windows, you have to build the examples with extra flags and
pass the location of the external Python 3 installation written
as an MSYS2 path:

    cd examples
    # ensure Windows-native binaries are available in PATH
    export PATH=/mingw64/bin:$PATH
    autoreconf -I/mingw64/share/aclocal -iv
    ./configure --enable-msys2 --with-python=/c/Users/ngdevkit/AppData/Local/Programs/Python/Python39/python
    make

    # build all the examples
    autoreconf -iv
    ./configure
    make


## Running the compiled examples

Once you have built the examples, go into a subdirectory to
test the compiled example and run GnGeo from the makefile:

    cd examples/01-helloworld
    make gngeo
    # or run "make gngeo-fullscreen" for a more immersive test

GnGeo will automatically enable the GLSL pixel shader if OpenGL
is available on your system and detected during the configure
step. For more info, look at the [common makefile](Makefile.common).

Note: If you're running a recent macOS, [System Integrity Protection][sip]
may prevent you from running GnGeo from make, so you may need to run
it from your terminal:

    eval $(gmake -n gngeo)


## Source-level debugging

ngdevkit provides a modified version of GnGeo which supports remote
debugging via GDB. You need to start GnGeo in debug mode and run
GDB to attach to it:

    cd examples/01-helloworld
    # start GnGeo in debug mode
    eval $(make -n gngeo) -D &
    m68k-neogeo-elf-gdb rom.elf

GDB uses the debug symbols from the ELF file rather than the ROM file
directly, so it knows all C source files, symbols and locations. This
enables source-level debugging of your C program in addition to usual
m68k ASM debugger.

Once GDB is started, connect to the emulator to start the the
debugging session. For example:

    # GnGeo listens on the standard GDB port 2159
    (gdb) target remote :2159
    Remote debugging using :2159
    0x00c04300 in ?? ()
    (gdb) b main.c:52
    Breakpoint 1 at 0x57a: file main.c, line 52.
    (gdb) c


## License

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU
Lesser General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
License along with this program. If not, see
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.


[ngdevkit]: https://github.com/dciabrin/ngdevkit
[brew]: https://brew.sh
[sip]: https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT204899
[msys2]: https://www.msys2.org
[pywin]: https://www.python.org/downloads/windows
